We are in the Planning Department of the City of
Houston, and I'm interviewing Johnny Rea.
Johnny, how do you spell your last name? R-A-I-A.
R-A-I-A. How long have you been with the Planning
Department? I've been here since, well I've gone
and come back, I've been here over 30 years but
there was a period that I left from 56 to 58 and went
out into the private sector and I worked with an
engineer and my training was in architecture and I
wanted to get into that and unfortunately I left at
kind of a bad time economic wise and so I came back to
the planning department and I've been here ever
since. When did you join the Planning Department?
What year was that? It was in 55. 55. And that was
under which name? Ralph Elliford. Ralph
Elliford. I served under every director we had
because Ralph was the first. Mr. Elliford was
replaced by whom? Roscoe Jones. Roscoe. And then,
of course, we have Mr. Garcia now. What have been
your assignments in the department? Well, I
started out in the drafting section, hosting
subdivisions, and there came a time when we needed
to have some public information, a person that
could handle the public and interface with the
engineers and the realtors and the public and the
whole spectrum. So I was very much interested in
that, so I took that. And I've had the public
information section since then. Let me just stop
this one.
So you've been dealing with the public for quite a
few years. How long has that been? Well, I left in
56. I went to work as an engineer. And actually, we
were doing a lot of apartment building. It was
really the rational apartments that were just
beginning in Houston. And then we hit a period of,
they call it, an economic recession. More like a
depression than a recession. And so business was
kind of rough. And at that time, there was some
changes happening in the planning department.
What kind of changes? Well, the assistant
director, Fernando Williams, he and one of the
planners, they're now Williams and Crawford, but
it was Fernando Williams and Harold Crawford,
they were forming their own company and they left.
And so there was just sort of a rearranging of new
people being hired in the department. So I came
back. And that's when we really specifically set
up a public information section. And it was just
sort of a realignment of duties within the
planning department. And I've been handling that
ever since. And there were times, of course, that
was a growing period. And there was just constant
information of realtors coming in for their
clients, the clients coming in, and engineers
coming in and checking on subdivisions and
widenings, and the whole planning process as it
was operating then. It was just handling the
public for that period. Well, you've observed
several styles of planning under the three
directors. Could you characterize those
different styles of planning? and the role of the
department? Oh, sure. I would say under Mr.
Elford, it was just the beginnings, the concepts,
and the major thoroughfare as we know it today was
born with him. That's when he was formally
presented, and he laid the groundwork for the
entire as we know it now, and I deal with major
thoroughfares all the time, so that's sort of like
the reference point. And then Mr. Jones continued
it, and of course Mr. Garcia is going into a
different phase because he's incorporating a
different concept. They're going into a
comprehensive plan, and I might say that before we
did a subdivision doing Mr. Jones's, Well, Mr.
Elliford was just in the sharp stand of Westbury,
and all of those were coming in. And then he left in
1963, and the building had already started. And
then he started. It was just a continuous flow of
subdivisions, and we just had a fantastic amount
of subdivisions that went from doing that to Mr.
Johnson's period. That was about the time that
Vernon Henry left. the department and open his own
practice? Vernon Henry was active. He was a
subdivision planner and he also was when we had the
zoning effort. We had a zoning effort here and he
worked with a planner in that section. It was
called Otto Krebs. Otto Krebs. He's since passed
away. But they had the big zoning effort and that
failed and he left pretty soon after that. and
started his own office. I think he was with
Newhouse and Taylor first, and then he formed his
own office. You've probably talked to him since.
Yes. And Mary Lou. And Mary Lou. And she worked here
too. I think that's where they met, isn't it? It was
an office romance. Well, not exactly at first, but
I guess you could say it evolved. Evolved, yeah.
Okay. Ross goes... view of the role of planning in
Houston I think was quite different than Ralph's.
I would say he wasn't here at the beginning, so I
think he pretty much followed the groundwork that
was laid with the authority that he had. Which was
apparently quite limited. Was Ralph's authority
so limited? Oh, when you're beginning something,
I would imagine everyone is, well, I'll use the
Major Thurford as a good example. If it wasn't
anything that, of course we had a skeleton out on
the front, but he was the one that formalized it and
had a major, which is what we were using as our
Bible, pretty much. So if you're starting
something, then by sheer necessity, you're
starting it. Mm-hmm. Then, of course, there were
variations on the theme and different
alignments, but it was pretty much the Planning
Commission was sort of using that as the
groundwork and was sort of carrying through a
concept that was born, Mr. Elford, born with Mr.
Elford and carried on by Mr. Jones, because it had
already been laid out and the construction and the
planning had started using the developers as they
presented their plans and got them processed
through the Planning Commission. Has the
succession of mayors made any impact on the
practice of planning in Houston that you can
characterize? I would say this, in Whitmer's
administration, well, Mr. Garcia has a complete
set of authority as it stands now. He's gone into a
number of things that I don't think we're here
doing Mr. Johnson's administration. This is a
whole different concept. He has the mayor behind
him in everything that he does. Are you suggesting
that this hasn't always been the case? Oh, well, of
course not. works at, serves at the pleasure of the
mayor. So it's just that you have a different, you
have a person now that seems to have brought Mr.
Garcia in to do a planning, even changed the name of
the department before it was city planning. And
that's called planning and development, which
means that it's one of the most significant
changes, I would say, is this development
process. I've been working a little with that,
too. And that's where we get a chance to look at the
construction where we didn't before. The main
thrust of a development plant is a setback. And
that was evolved because we had a major
thoroughfare. Woodway is a major thoroughfare.
We didn't have any setback lines. If we had
widening, it was precisely for the waterway and
suggested setback lines. Now, with the
development plants, you have a firm 10-foot
setback on a local street, a 25-foot setback on a
major thoroughfare. Woodway has some tremendous
office buildings that are built right on the
property line. We asked them, suggested setting
it back. They said, we can legally do this, so
they've done it. And so now we have what is referred
to as Woodway Canyon, because if you drive along
the street, you'll see that these buildings, you
have the sensation they're falling in on the
river. That's quite ironic. So this is a good
concept. That's quite ironic, because that's the
neighborhood that Ralph Elliford lives in. But
see, back then, we didn't have the authority for
setback lines. We had four, and there was a
tremendous- When did that happen, that the
authority was given to you? Oh, it was 82. 82. Now,
with Mr. Elliford, he did the, like I say, the major
thoroughfare plan was laid out. Then we had an end
one. When I came into the department, we were doing
what were called alignment studies, where we were
taking the major thoroughfares and actually
designing the widening, going- say taking aerial
photographs, taking base maps, going out in the
field and picking the most economical route to lay
out and coming back in, making an alignment,
presenting it to the mayor, approved by council.
Who was the mayor then? When I first came in, it was
Couture. And then there was a succession. He
served under a number of mayors for 20 years. And
that was really good. a large part of the operation
with the alignment studies. And that's the,
continued that process after it was, the mayor and
council approved it. It went to the permit office
and they literally held back a building. They have
the authority to hold back the building from
within those right-of-way lines that we had
proposed. It was sort of like an official plan line
then. Well, it was, sure. That kept the corridor
free. Right, but that was as far as the corridor,
but no setbacks. No setbacks. We had suggested
setbacks, but there's no way to say they could
build right on the proposed, up to that point,
building lines that was known were there.
Normally, setback, side and rear and front yard
setbacks are included in a subdivision, I think.
Yes, now that's usually the interior lot lines and
the rear property lines are handled by the permit
office. But these were the setback lines on the,
between the public right-of-way and the private
property. And that was the main, at least we had
that as a tool until we got the development plan. Of
course, in subdivisions, we did have a full range
of setbacks for your subdivisions, depending on
whether it was residential. Residential even had
a further setback than we use now. It was a 35-foot
setback off of a major thoroughfare. And then
they'd have 25-foot setbacks off of your local
streets. That was in a residential. And of course,
they could set back further. We have a number of
rural subdivisions where they even have as much as
50 and 75-foot setbacks back when they thought
that it was going to be out in the country. And
unfortunately, the country now is part of the
city. So they're trying to get those setback lines
changed around people in that area so they can use
that property. I don't know if that's, I guess
that's in business because it showed a thinking of
a subdivision back at that time.
Have you noticed any change in the structure of the
department itself? Oh, yes. How has that changed
through the years? Well, through the years from
alignment studies. Because you've been here the
longest of anyone. And so I'm relying on your
memory in terms of the dynamics of the
organization. Well, I'd say, as I've mentioned,
the alignment studies were really the important
things. When the subdivisions weren't, you know,
there just weren't that many. They were here, and
we were guiding them as it happened. But then I
would say the... that's when it started picking up
with the tremendous development that we've had.
So the importance shifted from the alignment
studies, which are now laid out, so it actually
came along at the right time, because we had
actually had a chance to lay out all of the
alignment and the major third figures. so the
developers could then, when they designed their
subdivisions, they were aware that they had to
dedicate the right of way for major
thoroughfares. So then it shifted from alignment
studies to these subdivisions that were actually
developing the land. And of course now the
subdivisions have sort of, because of the
economy, we don't have the volume of subdivisions
that we've had back when, say, Mr. Jones was here.
He was here at the peak of the development, our
subdivision development, I would say. And so now
we're getting into the comprehensive plan where
we're going now into neighborhoods are being
stressed more than they were. And you're doing it
by sectors, aren't you, or quarters or whatever?
Just announced yesterday. And of course, in the
past, we've had, they're called sectors now, but
we've had under the other directors. So they were
called planning units, planning areas,
neighborhood studies. But now I think he's
getting it into a formalized set of land areas that
we can look at and just go into the studies
in-depth. Money has a lot to do with that, too.
Maybe we're getting a little more money for these
studies that we've never had before. I guess when
things got breakneck speed with subdivisions, I
guess we were assuming we were pushing out and we
weren't thinking of the interior in it. the
interior neighborhoods take care of themselves.
But that's the difference, I would say, in the
mayors, is that you've got a mayor now that's very
much interested in the interior neighborhoods.
Well, I think that's interesting in terms of the
current economy and in terms of transportation.
Certainly, Houston is not a joy to commute in. And
that brings up the topic of Metro. Would you like to
prepare to comment on Metro at all? Well, Metro,
there's a need for it this year, and it's a thousand
percent better than what we've had in the past. I
mean, at least you've got bus routes now that you
can rely on. There seems to be some tremendous
leadership. From my impression, they're also
getting into the... some of the repair of streets
and some of the things from their monies that
they're getting through the one percent sales
tax. One percent. Everybody keeps thinking it's
one cent, but it's one percent. They're getting
charged tremendously. I would say more than the
city of Houston would because when it was, we were
the ones that actually did the beginning of Metro.
And it was a unique thing. It was... the county was
divided into five parts, and so they knew that the
whole county wasn't, maybe there might be a
different number, so they divided it into five
parts to see which areas would be interested, and
as it was voted on, four parts voted for it, one part
voted against it, and they chose not to be in it. I
don't know if you know this or not. No. But the
eastern part of Harris County, say from US 59, East
Texas Freeway, around to the Gulf Freeway, which
are all the smaller cities of Winter Park,
December City, and those cities chose not to
participate in Metro. So they do not collect the 1%
sales tax. So what you've got is all the north and
west areas that are, that's where all your money
from Metro is coming from. It's kind of a unique
thing. I thought we were taking less than a unit to
do this. Frateras County is a pretty big county as
they go in Texas.
When the city attempted to do this, then the bond
issue failed, as I recall, and that was something
of a setback. But then Metro was reorganized under
a separate administration, and then they were
able to move independently of city
administration, which probably turned out to be a
good thing. Yes, I mean, because they had a
different priority. But the way we interface now.
Excuse me, are you Mr. I was going to say they have a
set of, but the interface with the city is the fact
that they are now taking some of their monies for
the repair streets. And they're taking the
parking lot lots and that seems to be a successful
operation also where people are willing to get out
of their cars. Well, actually, they get in their
cars, park them, whatever, and then take their
ride into town. It's an interesting concept. I
guess it's been done all over the nation, but it's
the first time in Israel we've ever done it. That's
a new concept, and it seems to be working out pretty
good. And then the Highway Department has
cooperated in terms of bus lanes and whatnot. Now
that's another concept that Metro started. And it
seems to me, except for the people that are in the
cars, I'll add that. I get the complaints from them
that some people say that that's taking something
away from the... from the automobile, but we've
got to live together. If this can carry a lot of
traffic and a lot of people to a destination, then
so be it. We've got to work. That's part of the
implementation of the plan. And we're still using
the major thoroughfare plan that was laid back by
Mr. Olford years ago. And the more I see it, the more
I think it's brilliant the way he did it. The major
change that you've mentioned seems to be a change
in terms of the attention of the planning
department moving away from the periphery and
concentrating more on infill and more on the needs
of commuter traffic. and mass transit. And
actually, I don't know if you can say that the
Central Business District is as important as it
was back then. It seemed like when ASAP first came
in, the Central Business District was the main
thing. And it seemed like we did early subdivision
studies before the, that might be another thing I
want to add, that we were doing subdivision
studies back, when there wasn't as many
subdivisions coming in. And the stress was on
single-family residential. It was supposed to be
that way. And as things at Breakneck Street got
more and more, we didn't do the studies as much as
coordinating and giving the engineer a chance to
do the design of his particular subdivision and
thus coordinating it with the overall major
thoroughfare network. That's kind of a different
attitude also. But in doing the subdivision's
design and the engineer feeling that he had to
pretty much conform to that design, it was left up
to him. to just to interface with a sort of like a
guide rather than a controller. Maybe I'm using a
little bit of diplomatic language, but rather
than us designing a subdivision for someone here,
an engineer feeling compelled to use that design,
Mr. Jones said let the engineer design it and we
coordinate it with our overall plan. So that was a
little bit of a different kind of thing. The lead
now is probably being taken a little bit more by the
department. It sounds like there's a much firmer
control and much more enthusiastic applying of
rules and regulations.
Johnny, are there any comments that you'd like to
summarize with? Well, I've enjoyed the
department and enjoyed my, as I say, my expertise
is in public information, and I thought it would be
over, but there seems to be, the more we go, the more
the public needs to be informed. And this is one
thing for my standpoint, is I find that explaining
to a person, any individual, even when they
haven't conformed to the rules and regulations,
if you explain it to them reasonably, they seem to
understand. And it's an educational process.
There's one thing I'd like to ask you. If you know of
any documents that I can use in writing the history
of planning in Houston, that might be important.
If you could get those together for me, I would very
much appreciate it. And I can return them. We've
got some things here that I hand out to people
constantly that come in from out of state. Out of
the city, but out of state because of our unique no
zoning. So there's some information. We have some
papers that Mr. Jones had a paper on non-zoning in
Houston. And then there was an attorney that Mr.
Olson, That was the city attorney here that had a
speech that he seemed to cover pretty well. The
district said it's an alternate to zoning. And
there was an architect that, from his standpoint,
I'll get that for you also. OK. I'm going to be here
probably till about 3 this afternoon. So maybe I
could drop back after. Sure. I've enjoyed it very
much. Thank you very much.
The same day, we're in the office of Ephraim
Garcia, the Planning Director for the Department
of Planning and Development for the City of
Houston. Ephraim, you came from San Antonio.
That's correct. You worked for Winston-Martin.
Winston-Martin, the San Antonio Development
Agency. What was your responsibility in San
Antonio with Winston? I was the manager of the
project Planning and Management Division. We
planned the various projects and then managed
them after they were funded. These involved
neighborhood redevelopment projects, downtown
redevelopment projects, all the activities of
the development agency. That development agency
is somewhat unusual in Texas, isn't it? Well, I
think it's somewhat unusual nationally in that
the urban renewal projects that were handled by
that division have been successful throughout
that agency. And so that in San Antonio, the urban
renewal program is pointed out as a successful
program, where in many cities in the country, it
was an unsuccessful program.
Then you got the call from Houston. That's right.
When was that? How did that happen? Would you
describe the circumstances and the date? In
November of 1982, I received a call from a member of
the mayor's staff asking me to submit a resume,
that they were looking for a planning director and
I had been recommended. At that time, they didn't
indicate who I had been recommended by.
So I was not particularly over enthused with
coming to Houston, but I did send them a resume. And
I didn't hear anything from them from that date
until Christmas. A week after Christmas in 1982, I
received a call. Could I come up and meet Kathy
Whitmire and talk to her about the position? So I
came up here, and I had about a two or three hour
conversation with her. Left and went back home.
And the next day, they called me up and said that
they were prepared to offer me the position. Two or
three hours is a long interview. You're right. We
went over a lot of... It must have been serious.
And I wasn't quite that sure that I wanted to come up
because there was a lot of things going on in San
Antonio. I was thinking of going into the
consulting business and phasing out of the San
Antonio Development Agency and so forth. And so I
rejected the job offer and said that I was not
interested. Then... I began to get telephone
calls from various people, from Councilman Ben
Reyes, indicating that they
had been pushing Kathy Whitmire to get Hispanic
department directors, and I was the first one, and
that I was qualified, and I was turning them down.
And then there's a phone call...
We were at the point where I turned the job down, and
so I began to receive certain phone calls from
Houston people asking me to take the job. Then
Kathy Hoodmeyer called and asked me to come up
again for another interview. Now, what I found out
had happened is that they had, when I turned the job
down, they went out to various planning
consultants and people here and asked for
recommendations for a planning director. not
telling them that I had turned the job down. And
when the recommendations came in again, my name
was at the head of those recommendations. So they
decided to make a renewed effort to get me to.
And so by then, with the second interview, I knew
that I was kind of in a negotiating position now.
So we began negotiating as to what was involved.
We arrived at a consensus that if I took the job, I
would be given the free hand in reorganizing the
department, that the personnel would be provided
that I needed, that I could integrate. Since my
primary efforts in San Antonio had been
redevelopment, and I was very interested in that,
that economic development and redevelopment
would be made a part of the department instead of
separate divisions. And also that the computer
system that the city was introducing, the
Metricon computer system, would be assigned to
the department. At that time, I thought it was a
plus. I found out it was a liability afterwards.
And so we arrived at an idea that if I took over, I
would basically be given a free hand in the
department, that she was ready for planning, that
she was ready for initiating redevelopment. that
prior mayors had ignored redevelopment
entirely. Houston was a new construction town,
and you always went out and built on the edge of town
instead of trying to redevelop the inner city
neighborhoods. And since a large part of her
constituency was minority, she wanted to do
something about inner city neighborhoods. And
the thing that really convinced
me was the fact that The development ordinance had
just been passed, and she wanted someone to begin
to implement the development ordinance, which
are the first set of development controls. And so I
agreed to take the job, so I came to work here on the
1st of March. Afterwards, I found out that what had
happened is Kathy had gone down to San Antonio
shortly after her election and spent four days
down there going over the projects that the San
Antonio Development Agency, the redevelopment
projects that the San Antonio Development Agency
was doing, and looking at that, and then had asked
Henry Cisneros to recommend someone that could
come from San Antonio Hill to do the same type of
work, and that he had recommended me. I didn't know
what prompted the call for my resume. I found that
out later. Interesting. Very interesting. So
this is quite a change, then, in terms of the
structure of the Planning and Development
Department. Its name has changed, the structure
of it has changed, you have added
responsibilities now, and I understand that the
support, the decision-making support for the
planning function is much stronger than it used to
be. Yes. What has happened, first of all, in
numbers, the department has gone from 62 to 150.
How long did it take to do that? It took about three
years. Because we did it gradually. Secondly,
the management structure has been changed
completely. One of the big problems that I found
when I arrived here was that the planning director
was isolated. He had one secretary, and that was
the entire set of his staff. Then everything was
done at the division level. There was no assistant
director. That position had been vacant for
several months. And there was a division manager
that was functioning as the Kerry Gilbert was
functioning as the Assistant Director, and then,
of course, once my appointment was announced,
which was about a two or three month period, then
the prior director left. And so there was a gap.
Roscoe left. Roscoe left. He was on leave,
actually, but he left. And so that Kerry was
running the department when I got here. And I found
myself very severely handicapped initially with
a lack of an administrative support staffer for
the director. It was myself and the secretary, and
that was it. And the next step down was operating
divisions. For a city like Houston. Yes. And when I
asked the reason for this, I don't want to talk
about someone else, but I was told that someone
that only got three or four phone calls a week, that
was sufficient staff to support him. And so the...
And as I began expanding the department, I did not
want to initially start building my staff. So it
was a very difficult and slow process to get the
adequate support staff. But now we have a
well-organized, what I think is actually I think
the ideal organization for a planning department
in the country. Because we not only have the means
of preparing plans, But we also have the means of
implementing those. We have charge of the
Community Development Block Grant Program and
that budget. I'm a member of the CIP committee that
selects the CIP projects. I am in charge of a
committee that we call the Joint Referral
Committee that handles all matters that relate to
more than one department of the city. the Public
Works Department, the Traffic and
Transportation and Real Estate Department.
Those are usually matters dealing with real
estate, streets, acquisition, closing of
streets, and selling of city property, and so
forth, and acquiring city property. Do you have
anything to do with the annual budget, aside from
the departmental budget? The only annual budget
that we deal with is the annual budget for
community development. That's a $20 to $25
million budget that we prepare entirely here in
the department. But other than that, I only
participate indirectly in the annual budget in
that as part of the CIP committee, we then select
the projects that need to be done that indirectly
then establish a requirement for bond sales which
then established the requirement for debt
service in that particular year's bond issue. And
now in the period of shortfall, that has become a
rather important aspect of planning, that
securing and selecting the right projects.
Because we're looking now at projects, for
example, that do not require staffing after
they're constructed. So we're deferring, let's
say, a multi-service center as opposed to
building streets. We can build streets, and those
don't require any additional maintenance or
staffing. But if we built a multi-service center,
then we would have to hire the people to staff it.
And that would increase the operating costs,
would then add to the budget. So we do those type of
decisions, but I do it as part of the CIP committee
rather than. And the CIP committee is composed of
the director of public works, director of
finance, myself, and the representative of the
mayor's office. So it's a fairly small, powerful
committee. Yes. And historically, we're in the
third year of our CIP program. It started the first
year that I got here. And we have succeeded in
getting the city council to approve the CIP
prepared by this committee with only very, very
minor changes. And I think last year there was only
one project that was changed. Even though we have
abandoned the prior system in Houston of dividing
capital improvements to each council district,
whether they needed them or not, everybody got
their fair share. And now we're using a priority
system, which means that last year, for example,
on this current bond issue, one district got 28% of
the money. and one district got 5% of the money.
That disparity, and yet the city council approved
the plan unanimously. So they have basically
bought our process as being a good process. That's
quite a change from previous years. Ephraim,
recently you've been taking a little political
heat. And I understand you've written an article
that appeared in the Houston Business News? That
was an interview. An interview. And I understand
it was quite a good article that was published, and
I'd like to pick up a copy of that. Would you like to
comment on how this political heat was generated,
and by whom, and how you're responding to it? Well,
the political heat had to do with the Community
Development Block Grant Program. What I did is, in
October of 84,
the last major element that was added to the
department was the community development
division. And Houston has had a troubled
community development program. And when I took
over... It was not only troubled, but there was
some... Scandal, and there's been some
convictions, and so forth. And so I was handed a
program that had a backlog of $90 million of
unspent money, primarily in capital
improvements projects. And from that date,
October 84, when I took over the program, there was
$1 million of construction. To date, we have been
able to construct $52 million worth of projects.
And that involved having to go out and engineer,
design projects, and get them built. So we've made
considerable progress over these last two years.
Unfortunately, the Department of Housing and
Urban Development chose this year, when all the
progress is finally occurring, to penalize
Houston for the prior 12 years of malfeasance and
mismanagement. And so that's caused a political
problem, because the implication is, even though
HUD is saying, we're doing this because in all the
12 years of the history of the program, Houston has
never spent their full share of money, this is the
year they decided to do something about it. And so
the impression that has been left with some of the
council members and what the media has given
everyone is that mismanagement is still
occurring in the system, even though all the HUD
reports now indicate that we're doing well. And
the mayor and I have been meeting with the HUD
people trying to have them overturn that penalty,
which was they penalized us by taking $2.6 million
of our community development block. The
impression the media gives is that the planning
department is sitting on their hands and not
spending the money that they have available. No,
the money is being spent. In fact, this year HUD
established a goal of $37 million for us to spend,
which is almost twice of our annual allocation,
and we actually will spend over $40 million. and
we'll exceed the HUD goal by $3 million. And that is
the argument we're making to HUD, is we're
exceeding the goal. Why penalize, why select this
year to be the penalty year? And of course, they're
pointing out the fact that for 12 years, they have
been given priority goals, and they have never
been met. And they have got to understand that the
structure has changed now. Well, and just
yesterday, I received the annual monitoring
report, and they compliment us on all the
management changes and et cetera. But of course,
they're sticking to their decision to take the
$2.6 million as justified because they could have
taken as much as $10 to $20 million if they had
implemented that several years ago. So they're
telling us, you're lucky that we didn't do it then
and waited till now because we only took $2.6. But
that's cause for some bad relations with city
council members because they don't understand
the situation. So they want to know from you why it
hasn't been spent. Right. But you can give them
answers. Do they seem to be understanding this?
Well,
the form of government here in Houston is almost
identical to the federal system. You have the
mayor, who represents the administration. She
appoints the department directors. And then you
have the city council, which sits there as the
legislative body and is continuously at ends with
the mayor, at odds with the mayor. And so
therefore, even though the council members
understand, they still make out like they don't
understand because they get at the mayor by
criticizing her department directors. So
they're always on the directors, department
heads. They're always on the department heads
because that's the only way they can attack the
mayor. So whatever you do... you know that
whatever item you have on the agenda that you're
going to be brought up there, you're going to be
criticized. And a good example is the MetroCom
computer system. See, the MetroCom computer
system, among other things, has a complete map for
the city of Houston. It's a graphic. It's billions
of bytes of data. That's housed here in this
building? Yes. And what we have is... that the maps
that we put in there, while the Monumentation
Mapping Program that cost the city $2 million was
done in 1980, 1980 to 82. So the maps that we have
inputted into the computer system are 1980 to 82
maps. They are the most current maps available.
Yet they like to say, well, the metric system isn't
worth anything. All the data in there is five years
old. it's five years old because the maps are five
years old. And whenever a new monumentation
mapping program takes place, and that normally is
done every 10, 15, or 20 years, when the Corps of
Engineers and the Geodetic Survey and the city get
together to redo it, at that time we'll be able to
update it. In the meantime, we're trying to
correct and keep those maps current. But still,
the base data is 1982 data. And so they keep
criticizing the system for being five years out of
date, when actually it's as current as it can be.
And no matter how much you tell them that, Every
time an item comes up on the agenda for the Metricom
system, I still have to go up there and tell them why
I'm putting money into a system that's five years
out of date. Tough, tough, tough. Well, who built
the Metricom system? The Metricom system is the
originator of the system is Cinercom
Corporation, which is a Houston corporation. Oh,
mm-hmm. And right now they have six or seven cities
in the country, Long Beach, Indianapolis,
Wichita Falls, several cities that use this
system. We bought the system. The city has $24
million invested in it. And just to give you an
example of the way the council functions, last
week I had a $10,000 maintenance contract on the
agenda. $10,000 maintenance contract. And I have
to go in there and answer to them why we don't junk
the $24 million system and why they should approve
the $10,000 to keep the system going. Democracy at
work. But what it does is it has a complete database
of the city from a mapping property and facilities
point of view. The facilities that we have in there
are all the streets, the paving sections,
sidewalks, curbs. The water lines, sewer lines.
You have parcel data? Parcel data. In addition to
that, our system is compatible with the Harris
County Appraisal District, so they provide us all
the latest data on bulk loading tape. So we have all
that parcel and ownership information. And, of
course, with regard to that data, we're current.
We have the latest tack rolls in there. And the
Public Works Department has about 20 people that
they, every set of plans that is prepared, water
lines, sewer lines, et cetera, is entered into the
system. So you're current there. We're current
there. The only thing we're doing is putting it on a
map that is five years old. At that base, it's five
years old. Can USGS give you interim updates?
Well, what it involves, it involves two things. It
involves the mapping, but actually it involves
using aerial photography. correlated with the
mapping, and they're using photogrammetry in
order to make sure all the buildings and all the
structures are in the current locations. So our
plan eventually is to do one-third of the city
every year. And for the database to become an
income-producing database, it can be sold to
other people who need to have information, and
then the income generated from that would be
reinvested in the system to make it
self-sufficient. Well, I would think there would
be a lot of users that would be willing to pay for
that. Well, we have an advantage here that... Some
of the utilities are also in the same system that we
have. The gas company and the electric company,
HLMP and Intex, both use the same mapping system so
that we, in effect, can interchange data and pass
data back and forth. Also, Stewart Title Company,
which is a company that is contracted to do the work
for the appraisal district, using the same
mapping system, and so does Fort Bend County, and
our city limits extend into Fort Bend County, so
that we have a common base that we can work with.
Down by Missouri City in that area? Yes, sir. Well,
that sounds very interesting in terms of your
mapping. And, of course, then you can call up on the
system anything that comes up on the agenda. You
can take a quick look at it and get the... Yes, we...
Of course, the system right now is used, for
example, down at building permits. When a person
comes in for a building permit, they will pull up
the parcel with all the ownership data to make sure
that the right person is applying for the building
permit, what is there now, et cetera. But we also
have a lot of other uses. Although we're expanding
the database, since the planning department
wasn't involved in the initial planning of it, a
lot of data that we would...